No.
Okay. Nice to meet you. What a library
behind you.
Very nice to meet you. Hey, Alexi. Good
to see you. Hi, Mike. Good to to meet
you. We were just talking about how to
carry this on or can make connections.
So, Alexi had some ideas, please.
Yeah. Uh should we maybe you know have
us say a few words maybe Frank about who
you are because I I I'm so grateful that
the two of you are talking you're highly
influential in each of your respective
fields. You're both polycientists. Frank
is one of the few kind of you know uh
renowned psychologist who is uh uh brave
enough to use nonlinear dynamical
systems computer modeling and so you you
can speak the same language which I'm
very excited about.
Okay.
So, so I'm actually a psychiatrist
uh but I also had a degree in uh what
would be called neuroscience today. It
was more neuron more neuro anatomy
neurohysiology working on uh actually
invertebrates uh and uh love those
creatures. I ended up with
cockroaches you know which horrifies
some people um but they're fantastic
critters.
um kinds of things. And so I've been
there really a couple of of pathways
I've been going down which um you know I
see the connections most people don't
but one of them is looking at a
particular disorder called dissociative
disorders and multiple personality
disorders but really generalizing that
to a a set of disorders characterized by
rapid transitions in mental state and
and so that bipolar
orders in there. Panic attacks are in
there. Catatonia is in there. Flashbacks
are in. There's a whole series of really
psychiatric disorders in which one of
the primary issues is a very rapid
transition from one state of mind into
another state of mind. And so I'm
interested in what constitutes states
particularly in the process of
transitioning
uh from from one one state to another.
So I'm interested in the disorder. I'm
interested in the what I see as a larger
set of dynamics that are applicable to
other disorders and probably represent a
place of clinical leverage. If we could
control switching, we could switch
people out of depression. We could
switch people out of mania. We could
block panic attacks. We could do a lot
of these things much more readily. Uh
the other thing based on what I work.
Based on that work, I transitioned a lot
to
children and um partly because my work
with the adults told me that they had
been this way since children and that it
wasn't really possible to sort of
retrospectively
uh figure out how they developed into
kind of what I would call an us rather
than an I. That is the degree of
unification
uh in in the personality. Uh and so um
in that context I saw a lot of what I
felt were biological changes in these
children and um I created a study uh
back it started officially in 1987 still
goes on it's kind of encompassed three
generations looking at uh sort of the
biological effects of of very serious
child abuse.
This basically we chose incest which you
know kind of hits at the relationship
level. Typically there's a huge number
of episodes. It's not simply a
molestation by a stranger but by a
family member who's living there. It's a
real hit and have been following a
sample all these years and looking at
them first biologically and looking at
the HPG axis, HPA axis, looking at um
cognitive development in these in this
sample looking looking at a number of
different things came to the conclusion
that we were looking at an accelerated
aging process and that now with the
epigenetic work on looking at epigenetic
age acceler acceleration. Um we really
sort of nailed that. Plus now other
people using we had this kind of
prospectively longitudinally. We could
see that their cognitive they peaked out
cognitively much earlier than um our
control sample. They um had sort of
lower attainment levels. their HBA axis
went through this transition uh much
faster. Their HPG axis was accelerated.
They came into puberty about a year
earlier than our match controls, which
is a big thing developmentally. Uh it
has a lot to to do. These are all girls,
by the way. I'm sorry to say that this
was a group of incestuously abused
girls. Um and then we we've seen their
children and we actually uh also follow
prospectively their mothers got
retrospective histories on their mothers
and then sort of prospectively. So we
had kind of three generations and so I'm
also interested in intergenerational
transmission of risk and because you
just see it just huge uh that these
families just have you know trains of
abuse going back generation after
generation after
generation. And that's actually
something I'm trying to take on with
computer modeling because you can't
can't you know do that experiment really
if you think about it. But but we have
about 20 things that we can identify as
factors for intergenerational
transmission. And so using sort of
agent-based modeling kinds of attacks,
I'm interested in in seeing what if I
can figure out what are the real pivotal
issues here and what are the essentially
the tipping points um that that lead to
um transmission across generations or at
least increased risk for transmission
across generations. It's kind of a crazy
sort of problem, but I I don't see
another way to sort of approach it. So,
so I have those sorts of issues. In the
in between, I also ran a for about 12
years ran a forensic center that
evaluated children and followed them and
their their families, but actually did
the forensic evaluations involved
testifying in court, dealing with all
the legal issues. and I had a um fairly
large-scale prevention program and this
was in the city of Cincinnati where um I
did a sort of maternal intervention
aimed at helping the children. So So
that's kind of a sweep of of the
different kinds of issues. For me,
they're all kind of part of the same
problem, but but people can't say what
do states have to do with prevention of
child abuse. um kind of so so that's a a
short story I guess fascinating
fascinating um yeah many things to to
talk about and I'll I'll I'll I'll tell
you kind of the big picture of what we
do but I just wanted to because you
brought it up I wanted to say um one one
interesting thing that is brand new out
of our lab that you may not have seen
yet regarding to aging to what you said
about aging. So it turns out that in
normal normal p you know normal human
patients if there is such a thing if you
um if you look at the gene expression
that they have young versus versus older
one of the things that we find is dur
during aging is a
dissociation of the phoggenetic age of
the genes that they are expressing. And
what I mean by that is younger
tissues, all of the different organs are
in pretty tight agreement about where on
the tree of life most of your genes
should be. So there's there's this
um technique called phylo strategraphy
which tells you for for any given gene
you know roughly how old how old it is
right across the tree. So if so if you
look at if you look at young young
tissues all of the tissues in the body
are basically concordant with respect to
the age of the genes that they're
expressing during age the different
organs start to float away from each
other. They start to dissociate and they
start to express differently across the
tree of life including some of them go
go backwards right traverse the
evolutionary history backwards towards
more primitive genes. But what you find
which I think is is to me quite
interesting with respect to what you
study is is the loss of concordance.
They are no longer in agreement. There's
not just one story about where we are on
the tree of life, but there are multiple
stories. And and and you know how much
of the aging phenotype is actually a
consequence of the fact that you are now
I I don't know if they're switching.
It's you know we don't know that. But
but what we do know is that you now have
different regions in the body that are
no longer in agreement about um where
where what the age of their gene should
be. And and I think very interesting.
Isn't that wild? So so we study I mean
for years we've been studying the
spatial dissociation of cancer. So
cancer in many ways is a is a disease of
um of of of spatial dissoci. I mean I
call it a sematic dissociative disorder
because because what's what happens
literally is that cells disconnect from
the electrical um network that keeps all
of the cells uh focused on building and
maintaining specific things. So they
have this this large scale pattern
memory whether it be a heart or you know
liver or whatever they're working on.
Individual cells disconnect from that
and they can no longer remember that
goal and now they're just amiebas in the
environment and they do what single cell
organisms do. And we've developed a kind
of um uh uh integration approach where
we don't kill the cells, we don't fix
the genetic mutations if they have them.
What we do is we reconnect them to the
forcibly reconnect them to the
electrical network and they rejoin and
they start doing normal things and
behaving normally and and you know and
they they they stop making tumors and
that kind of thing. But whereas cancer
is that kind of dissociation in in
space, it now starts to look like aging
like human aging is a dissociation in
time specifically in evolutionary time.
And so I think this this issue of I mean
you know I think this is why Alexi
brought us together this this issue of
dissociation and and reassociation and
switching is has profound consequences
across scales you know not just
cognitively but but sematically and and
biomedically as well. Yeah. Yeah. I know
that that's certainly one of the places
I felt that there was a connection
there. So they were sort of on very
different
scales
versus people. Yeah. So so overall, you
know, that's that's what that's what I
study. I I I want to understand um how
mind how very diverse kinds of minds
come to be, how they scale up, how uh
parts become integrated. So cognitive
glue mechanisms, how do how do parts and
this might be cells and they might be
neurons as in your case or they might be
other kinds of cells as in my case um
form collectives that are uh dominated
by specific um thought patterns that
that make them more than the sum of
their parts. And we see this and so and
so what I like to do is is is steal
tools from from the um cognitive
behavioral science community and the
neuroscientists and apply them widely
first in other kinds of cells. That's
almost trivial because because that is
where the the the mechanisms are all
homologous. That is where the brain
evolved all of its cool mental tricks is
by by pivoting them from from anatomical
spaces that have been that have been
navigated since the beginning of
multisellularity. actually bacterial
bofilms even. Um, but we also apply them
to some other really weird things that
are not cells. So, you know, that's
that's what I'm interested in is is um
learning to detect un unfamiliar minds
and in weird embodiment and trying to
understand the scaling process by which
they they um they they dissociate and
and associate in the first place.
Very very interesting. I thought your
papers were very interesting. Oh, thank
you. the cognitive glue paper. I read
that several times, you know, I had a
little more trouble with the thoughts
and the thinkers, but I I really liked
the the uh cognitive glue. I thought
that was extraordinary. The experiments
were just amazing to me
actually. Yeah.
Would it be okay if I try to share a
very brief kind of attempt to to
integrate your work, Michael? Go for it.
Go for it.
So I was thinking Michael to start with
your hypothesis that you know if we
um take development first development is
active there is a morphogenic goal set
up and to me during development it's a
very active phase there's a lot of work
to do a lot of construction to make and
uh in that sense the system is hopeful
optimistic you know it's hopeful to
reach the goal and you have this measure
in your paper with Leo uh active
information storage which simply means
that during development there's much
data transfer from the past to the
present. We use our memories quite a bit
and we use them to move toward the goal
in the future. What that means is that
temporal uh depth is significant. Your
light cone is present during development
right and uh then when the goal is
accomplished let's say adulthood or the
certain organ is built then from that
point forward there's not much future.
the future is predicted to be the same
and there's no need to use the memory
systems much there's no construction
going on so the temporal depth collapses
the temporal light cone is is shrinking
in that point and um conversely I mean
this could be seen as the onset of aging
if you wish I just wanted to put it out
there that the word you used it's it's a
morphogenic dissociation in that sense
that the temple depth collapses when the
aging starts because the goal is is
reached this is why reaching the goal is
is happening
And then if you do your cure of
regenerative work, let's say
regeneration of a limb, the new goal
shows up. There's again a planning for
the future. There's again the use of the
past and the system is again hopeful. So
then I I just want to put the time
parameter there uh explicitly. And to go
to Frank's work now with let's say
complex PTSD, right? Uh now the scale is
different. Your work is cells, tissues,
organs, right? Uh Frank's work is the
entire person.
and perhaps over longer time scales like
several generations. But if we take
complex PTSD which briefly is u
prolonged unbearable stress in
circumstances when there's no escape and
repeated trauma then we can say that
sometimes the person becomes resigned
saying there's nothing to do which we
call helplessness and nobody's coming in
to help right and that's the there's no
more goals because there's nothing to do
it's helpless and also there's no future
the person is extremely pessimistic if
not depressed and dysphoric The only
prediction is the pain and suffering
will continue but nothing good is
predicted right and in that sense
there's no goals in the future you know
that there's just perpetuation of uh
suffering and the extreme form of that
is suicidality saying that the only way
to resolve it is to is you know
destructive what I'm saying is that
state of resignment is also the collapse
of the temporal goal there is no future
and there's no need for you is the past
you know the only prediction is is that
uh so there's some similarity in that in
that sense
Now in therapy many things happen and
Frank helped us so much with Bethany
Bran's work and Ruth Lenuse of sort of
finding common ground but one of the
small components of therapy at some
point in the middle maybe is
installation of hope. the hope comes
back there's something to live for as
nature said right and the third
perspective is free energy principle
which I think complements your work
nicely because FEP I think is about
maintenance after you've reached the
goal the morphostasis the maintenance of
the shape is FEP and FEP has optimism
bias the FEP system predicts to remain
and it does certain things to do so it
perceives the world builds the model of
the world and it acts upon the world to
continue persisting so in that sense it
it it it's opt optimistic. Now you know
as uh you know there's forces of nature
that are trying to decay the feep system
and uh for different reasons. So there's
sort of stress on the boundary on the
mark of blanket and the nature wants the
system to stop but what then we need
energy to maintain the system
morphostasis takes energy as uh Chris
Fields succinctly says it takes energy
to reduce uncertainty. So in fact it
takes energy to reduce uncertainty
whether I'll live or all day glare here
just mask out
sun coming in upper window here it's I
feel optimistic from the sun I love it
but you know so then again to go back
aging can be seen as a gradual
withdrawal of energy from this force of
maintenance under feep we have two
forces the dissipative force the decay
is called gradient flow and the one that
maintains life is called the solenoidal
flow. So when aging starts and the
energy is gradually decreased from the
force that maintains the system
structure, then it starts decaying
gradually and uh that that can be
description of aging from the FEB
standpoint. And I'll probably stop
talking at this point, but I don't know
if that's how that sounds to both of
you. Well, as I say, I keep feeling
there are places where we sort of
crisscross, but it's at such different
scales.
I'm is when we talked on the phone I
um was very interested in in this idea
of your temporal collapse and and
particularly what aspects of
dissociation you felt emerged from that
process. I had a sense that you felt
that temporal collapse collapse brought
on
dissociation. Is is that correct that
that that the dissociation as we
understand it clinically the sort of
outside of the body and the sense of
multiple separate selves and the amnesia
uh those symptoms emerge out of the
temporal collapse or does it
our hypothesis and I think we're working
on you know just building the model in
silicing what happens uh in a computer
modeling but the idea there Frank was
that you The continuation of self in
time requires a temporal depth. Meaning
I am the same as I have been and I
predict to be the same Alexi in the
future. Now when that collapse and I
live in the here and now of the few
seconds or a few minutes or whatever and
there's no temporal depth that then
essentially there is no continuity of
self. It's discontinuous.
So we we the only thing we're saying is
that that temporal uh depth is a
prerequisite for coherence of the self
is is one of the arguments in the paper
that without it it's it's pretty
impossible to maintain the coherence if
it makes any sense. So it is really
different than what I'm thinking about.
Um what's one of the striking features
of of uh dissociation is
amnesious and they're usually
autobiographical amnesia. That is people
cannot remember
um parts of their personal history and
so they don't feel connected to that
flow of history. That is part of what is
provides continuity in a sense of self
that is across time is that you reach
back and you feel like you're the same
person you were yesterday because you
have a continuity of memories not
because your DNA has changed or your
fingerprints have changed or something.
So that that amount of ability to sort
of reach past memories and to some
extent future aspirations say is state
dependent and so in different mental
states. So a manic person will tell you
very different things about their past
and their future and the present than a
the same person when they're depressed.
they they have their associations are
are are very different even though they
all the history is common across them.
And so one of the things you see in
different states is and and we're
talking about a disorder that's
characterized by a lot of different
states. That is when you're dealing with
somebody who has multiple personality,
they have half a dozen or more sort of
fairly discreet states. And they're
discreet not only sort of
psychologically, but actually
biologically. Um, and um, but that's not
so surprising given that, you know, if
you look at somebody who's the same
person depressed and the same person
manic, they're physiologically different
also. Um and uh so and if you look at
the same person having a panic attack
versus a euthyic state, they're
physiologically different. So states
have a physiological difference. And
somebody who is switching states a lot
as these people switch states. um has
has sort of a lot of discrete
physiological differences but also
cognitive differences particularly in
terms of ability to access uh past
knowledge history both and so you'll
find some of them who are completely
past focused that is they are living in
the past um they have a different body
image of themselves that they think
they're a child or they think they're at
a different age and then you have others
who think that they're at some other
kind of age. So, so you have this kind
of
temporal sort of series of I don't know
contemporal
compartmentalizations in these people.
Um, and that shows up as amnesas for
past experiences so that they then don't
remember doing things that they were
witnessed doing and and that sort of
thing. um and that is a function of the
different dissociative states. We can go
in and give cognitive measures and and
see those differences in in in the
individual uh in terms of their
cognitive attainment, what they can do,
what what information they can retrieve.
We can give one personality uh a list of
words and another personality a list of
words that are very similar but
different like sofa and couch or lamp
and light or something like that. And
look at crossover. How much interference
is there across? and and some of them
are um very very able to keep this
information very very separate and uh
whereas our control subjects the
information gets all confused uh and
they can't pick out which list a word
came from and they can't give you words
on list A versus list B so there is this
sort of state compartmentalization
cognitively there's kind of a physiology
that's pretty replicable across
different states we would measure most
most of our subjects
um multiple times across multiple days
and and see that uh that not the u
different states or personality states
were were pretty coherent within
themselves but over across time across
states there was a lot of difference but
there were certain places where there
were connections one more at what I'd
call the autonomic nervous system level
things like habituation to startle so if
you habituated one personality that
habituation carried across the other
personalities if you're two startles. So
there were certainly connectivity also
they were not separate entirely separate
there were levels of of connectivity
even though their subjective experiences
is um very much as if they were separate
people. I mean and they're adamant about
that. I I uh had this experience of
talking to a subject I saw in 1981.
Okay, he's now like 90 years old and he
hunted me down and wanted to talk about
the study he was in with me and um one
he was remarkably consistent you know
I'd seen him you know 30 40 years ago
and and uh as I met again his
personalities Philip Luther
um one called Legion who's his angry
personality
um it was like wow they're just the same
as they were 40 years ago. Uh the other
thing is he's kind of remarkable because
he's still alive at 90. Most of these
people don't make it past about 65 or
so. They they're they're very much I
think what we're seeing with this
accelerated aging is that they make it
to about 60 65 and then there's just
this massive die off. That's because
they're developing all these common
causes of death but at much earlier
ages. This is one of the consequences of
the earlier accelerated aging in them is
and you see that in so epidemiological
studies of people who have these
histories that there's a big dropout in
your population at around 60 65
um for that and um some of the studies
show that that these very serious early
childhood experiences take about 20
years off your life. So they they they
really are examples of this accelerated
aging uh and its consequences. Now we're
just beginning to tap that um I think
with and but I'm very excited about this
these epigenetic tools that are coming
out in terms of providing us with
biomarkers to look at the effects of
trauma. And what we see in the very
limited data we have is and I would
stress that um is that the traumatic
experiences happening in childhood seem
to be much more associated with
subsequent accelerated aging than
traumatic experiences that happen in
adulthood
uh kinds of things. So that in that
developmental period that that seems to
be um and and all the childrens who
looked at so far have uh who in
childhood have uh this epigenetic aging
acceleration effect whereas not all the
adults have that. Um kind of thing but
the ones who have it are more likely to
have had trauma trauma in childhood.
Super interesting. Um I I have a
question and then then I I want to
comment on what what Alexi had said. My
question is this. Um in in these
patients do are are are are the
different personalities
um how shall I how should I ask this? Uh
do do they have similar cognitive power?
And what I mean by that is do you get
the sense that the sum total of
cognitive performance that a given
volume of the human brain can you know
can can put forth is is there an issue
that uh an interesting question about
how do you support multiple such things
on the same hardware right you see what
I'm getting at in other words you would
you would think that and I know there
are other reasons to not think this but
but the naive assumption is that there
is some degree of of cognitive
performance that a given volume of of
substrate can can manage and suddenly
you're running multiple humans on the
same in the same you know in the same
amount is that is that an issue or do
you feel that they're each one of them
is then diminished so that the sum total
is basically preserved
so so really essential question uh um so
actually what you do see is
compartmentalization of certain
functions so so um I've had um a number
of extraordinary performers
come through. And um in certain
personality states they were capable of
really extraordinary kind of cognitive
functions. In other personality states
they they were that was not available to
them uh kind of thing and and one of
them
was a student at Harvard um who uh I had
completely independent verification from
a professor about her. He asked he came
and asked me about her. Um and
um she in in she was in law school and
she was also getting a degree in physi
uh
philosophy and um she could write with
both her hands in in her legal state.
And he said it was driving the other
students nuts because she was taking two
streams of independent thoughts off
lectures and they he said they were very
competitive bunch and the idea that this
fellow student was taking two sets of
notes that were different was um so so
but that was confined to a particular
altered state. Now she also had um
really remarkable photographic memory. I
took her down to the stacks of law, the
National Library of Medicine, and I
would pull a book off the shelf, open it
to a page, she could look at it for a
minute, and she could read it back
verbatim. Um, it was extraordinary. And
and I certainly have seen this certain
altars having
um sort of idiot savant level kinds of
functions that were very kind of
narrowly associated with these different
sorts of states. Um, and then the same
one woman uh had a a child state called
Missy. And and Missy was just a little
tiny little child curled up in a ball
and and would speak in this little tiny
whisper and really
couldn't sort of participate in many of
our studies uh kind kinds of things. Um
so so um it's not as if they all
necessarily add up to one single unified
sense of self. There are a series of
preserved abilities that are very sort
of compartmentalized
uh in them and they they excuse me for
um they adapt to the world by developing
personalities that handle functions that
they can't handle in other states. And
so it gets to be kind of highly refined
in some of these people um where
there'll be one who puts gas in the car
and that's the mechanic and that's all
that sort of state comes out for is that
it's triggered by the need to fill up
the car and so that's that state comes
out kind of thing. Um so the the
capacity is in there somewhere but it
isn't generalizable. It's very
compartmentalized. I mean, I think and
so one of the consequences for them in
behaviorally is they can't learn well
from experience because the experience
and the consequences are often quite
separated and and so they they end up
being very proverative and making the
same mistakes over and over and over
again kinds of things. and they can't
use what they know is it's a kind of a
metacognitive deal for them. Amazing. Uh
do do the do the individual
personalities ever uh express a
resistance to any kind of integration?
Do they have some kind of a
self-preservation quality where they
they don't want to disappear into a
larger integrated personality? Yes.
Yeah. In fact, that's probably the norm
that they interested in preserving their
them the individuality intact. And so
clinically, you're not bo you're not
trying to integrate them whatever that
is. It you're trying to develop more
harmony, more internal communication.
And sometimes that needs to pass through
some sort of
outside process. So, I had a technique I
call the molting board where they left
each other notes and on the refrigerator
for example, and that's how they began
to break down some of those cognitive
barriers. and they'll talk about having
meetings together in which different
ones participate and contribute to kind
of a and that's sort of where you you
want to go clinically is increase the
internal harmony, you know, not so much
force them to be one, but they're very
afraid of that actually. Afraid that
you're going to get rid of the others,
which you can't do, but that's their
perception that you're going to get rid
of some and keep others.
I mean it's an interesting both both
that and the thing that Alexi was
talking about has potentially it's very
um direct suggestions I think for
therapeutics on the CA both on the
cancer side in this case and on the
regenerative side for the things that
Alexi was talking about because um you
know the thing about the bulletin board
I mean this is this is a stigmy that the
cells use all the time and and patterns
in the body use all the time to leave
messages for each
And I wonder if the cancer therapeutics
that we were using where we do actually
forcibly integrate them whether that's
too much of a sledgehammer and that um
listening to what you just said maybe
maybe uh the limitation of that is going
to be the resistance uh and then instead
of instead of that what we should be
going for is to augment the stigmargy
between them so that they have they they
can communicate um but are not you know
reduced reduce that that threat of that
they're going to be wiped out. I mean,
we as as you know, as as the clinician,
you want to wipe it out in that case,
but but but maybe maybe you don't go in
there with a therapeutic that is super
obvious about it. Um and uh and and you
know, maybe we got to um do it slightly
differently. the thing the thing with
with with what Alexi said about about
the the the f you know hope and and and
the collapse of the the future and all
that also very interesting uh in terms
of both both aging and and regeneration.
I mean, I I think there's a lot to be
said for the fact that in some organisms
like us, the vast majority of our cells
do not believe that they're going to be
able to regenerate and they and thus
they don't. And it would be we've I've
I've thought about different ways to um
uh affect that prior you know like like
one of the things one of the things we
found that that helps is if you so so
for the for the leg regeneration work um
what we do is we after amputating the
limb you put on this wearable
bioreactor. So it's this thing that
provides an enclosed aquous environment
for the wound and then you can put in
various payloads like ion channel drugs
and things that try to try to induce um
specific morphagenetic events. But even
an empty biodome helps. An empty biodome
that has nothing in it, no payload at
all is already somewhat uh inducive of
regeneration, I think, because it
provides for the cells evidence that
they can impact their environment. If
you're out in dry air as a mammal or if
you're in a giant bucket of water as a
as a as a frog, you everything you you
you do not have the ability to establish
um properties of your micro environment.
It you have no control over your micro
environment in those scenarios. But if
you have a protected aquous small volume
environment, you can. So, by putting
autocrine signals out there, you can
say, "Hey, wait, I I did increase the pH
of the medium or or I did increase the
amount of um you know, sodium or BMP or
what whatever it's going to be." And so,
so even that is already by giving them a
little bit of control um over their
micro environment all because that's
that's a major puzzle that know
everybody why that you know why why does
the empty biodome work that shouldn't
be. I actually think that's maybe one of
the key parts of this is to is to
convince the cells that there actually
is a future here. That they're not just
waving out in the wind as as um you know
as as an animal would be in the wild. It
gets their leg bitten off. You know,
you're going to be trying to step on it,
grinding it into the forest floor.
You're not going to regenerate anything
under those circumstances. It's not safe
and it's and it's in fact foolish to put
energy into trying because whatever you
try to grow is not going to work. But
but but but but maybe that biodome and
I've also been thinking about um uh very
and I'm not an expert on this on this
part but but some kind of plastagens you
know psychedelics that try to kind of
enlarge the basically basically increase
the plasticity of of and the reduce the
certainty of your priors right you as a
as a mammal as a mamalian limb you have
very strong prior that you're never
going to be able to to regenerate. Um
your liver doesn't share those priors
for some reason but um but but but your
limb but your limbs do. And so, uh,
well, and deer antlers, deer antlers
don't share them either, right? So, bone
there, you've got, you've got bone,
vascule, internvation skin every year,
you make, you know, a centimeter of new
bone per day when they're regenerating
these things. I mean, it's insane. And
so, that's amazing process and the nerve
innovation and that is just
extraordinary. Yeah. You know, that kind
of thing. Well, let me react to that. Um
because here's where I do see f first of
all where you do see integration is
spontaneous. That is you've broken down
the barriers in some way between these
different states or personalities. You
know it's the language there is always a
little tricky. Um and that they're
better able to share information and
particularly retroactive retrospective
memory. Um see and that's where the
trauma comes in often that that trauma
is very
encapsulated.
Um what uh and so what you often are
faced with a clinician is they come in
and they say you know tanya and Tom have
joined you know and they're Toma or
something like that. Uh and so um rather
than trying to force this which is what
happened in the field very early on
where people were using these hypnotic
ceremonies and rituals trying to fuse
these things together it's more likely
to happen spontaneously.
Now that bio you know compartment that
you're talking about what the the
patients do is they create that for
themselves and that for the different
personalities if you go to their house
you'll see that house is not set up in
some sort of continuous linear way for
you know like an adult to trim it's set
up in little areas and this is Tanya's
area and Tom's area and this sort of
thing. It's very
compartmentalized. And when those states
come out and they often come out in some
very regular way in in the spontaneous
world, we've done things like put
beepers on them and beeped them at
different times and said what's going on
and what personality is out and and and
that sort of thing. And we find that
they're very different than they are in
the office. So what you see in your
office is not necessarily what that
person is living in the in the world in
terms of the frequency of the the
altered personalities. Um, but they
create different spaces for themselves
where they can go off and be kind of by
themselves and that enlarges and part of
that integration process is that Tom and
Tanya will merge their
spaces and so that they feel comfortable
that way also. So you see this process
going on and and to some extent being
acted out in their
environment. Amazing. Um, you know, uh,
yeah, sorry. Please go ahead.
Sorry, what? No, please, please finish
finish your thought. I was just saying I
looking at my reflection of the sun is
angle is wiping me out. Looks it looks
like you're about to be, you know,
kidnapped by aliens.
The beam Yeah, the beam is coming. Um,
yeah. Uh it's you know it's very
interesting about these areas and
merging the areas like we see we see
this kind of thing where these these
dynamic patterns battle for re for real
estate in the body and um and they
compete and sometimes they merge and
sometimes they integrate and sometimes
they don't and they set up boundaries
between them and like um if we uh if if
if if we if we induce using ion channel
expression a specific bioelectric state
in a region and and this that specific
bioelectric state is the thing that
generates eye formation. It's the it's
what triggers eye formation in our face.
You can make ectopic eyes anywhere in
the body. But what often happens is
there's this there's this battle between
the pattern that you've induced that
says all to all the cells even the ones
you didn't touch. They say they they
they it's a group effect. So so if I if
I manipulate um you know 30 cells they
will get hundreds of their neighbors to
help build this eye. But the neighbors
are resisting at the same time because
there's a different pattern there that
says, "No, we should be gut or we should
be skin." And those two those two
patterns have to fight it out. And
sometimes they they establish a border.
I'm going to be this, you're going to be
that. And they settle down and that's
it. And then sometimes they integrate
and and they make other things that are
neither of those two things are sort of
a combination. And sometimes one wins or
the other one wins. So, for example, the
you know, you often see we have these um
uh uh these transgenic animals that
light up with the early eye gene ricks
one. And so, we can inject our thing and
we see, oh, this thing's going to have
eight different eyes because there eight
different spots of Ricks one coming on
and it comes on and it starts making the
eye. And then the other cells around it
as actually I think it's part of the
cancer suppression mechanism. They
actually convince the cells you don't
want to do this. were going to be skin
and they basically and the way it's
mediated by electrical synapses by gap
junctions that that enable the local
voltage to take over and they just
acquire um let's say a
skin pattern and they and they go away
or sometimes the eye is strong enough to
establish no I'm going to uh we're going
to we're going to we're going to be an
eye and here's the limits of it and you
you guys can be skin outside of that and
that's it and you can see and you can
see this and you can uh you can
potentiate one way or the other by
manipulating um the voltage by manipul
ating the the communication through gap
junctions. And it's this like you know
battle of battle of of
of you can say personalities but but but
you know morphagenetic um worldviews
about what how how are we going to go
into the future? Are we going to go as
an eye or as skin or or what are we
going to do? You know
I had a reaction Michael. Go ahead. Go
ahead Frank. I just was saying I thought
those eye experiments were extraordinary
and that they were
functional was just amazing to me. Yeah.
What you said about the empty container
that or uh promotes regeneration we we
have a uh a direct analog of that in
psychotherapy. In fact, the word
container is used, you know, but if we
take developmental analogy, then you
know, the the three-year-old starts
exploring or even younger child crawling
to different corners when there's a safe
base, mom's lap. When the child doesn't
have a safe base, they explore less. So
and what we sometimes do in therapy what
what is one of the components of
therapeutic alliance is to create the
safe space to which the sort of patient
grows into as opposed to forcing them or
telling them nudging you know whatever
and so that that is is sort of very
resonant to to what you said when when
it's perceived that this space in the
relationship the diic space is safe then
the growth starts so yeah I agree with
you know, creating a therapeutic space
is is really a critical piece and that
safety is probably the central piece of
that. If you can establish they feel
safe, then you can deal with a lot of
other issues. Yeah. And I think that the
thing
that I would stress in a way about the
trauma here is is um I I'm very much
struck by the data that we and others
have about attachment
um and particular form of attachment
called type D attachment which is um
very disruptive and people call it
disordered
dissociative attachment is um highly
correlated with later developing uh high
levels of dissociation, pathological
levels usually of dissociation.
There are two or three longitudinal
studies that started out classifying
infants and then ended up you know
looking at adults and
so those of basically all found that
infants and toddlers classified as
highly type D attachment
um end up with as adults with the higher
levels of dissociation. So the question
and what we know is that the parenting
practices there are harsh abusive uh
kinds of and you see uh some studies as
much as 80% of really malreated children
will have a type D attachment or
attachment disturbance. They're very
different clearly from the ABC type uh
classifications that that came before.
Um so how does that trauma impact these
kids? So I think it part a lot of it has
to do with safety and creating a safe
sense and kind of going internalizing
someplace I can go where where I feel
safe but it also has to do with the fact
that um the parents aren't teaching the
generalization of information across
states. I think parents very much uh
good parenting very much involves
helping the child understand that a lot
of principles cross your different
states and so and but all and also
having to uh address the idea that
certain states are appropriate in
certain situations and not appropriate
in others. Uh so you have one state in
sort of a religious situation and
another state when you're in a football
stadium and and that these are the
different ways of being and sort of
different senses of self that go along
with it and identification with
different sort of processes whether it's
your religion or it's your favorite team
um kind of thing. and once when is it
appropriate to be going, you know, go
this, go that versus, you know, u and
what we see is that that's not going on
with these kids. So, they're kind of
left on their own to
develop their sort of set of states and
nobody's attempting to integrate across
those states to say, remember what we
learned here? Well, you can apply that
there. This is part of that cause and
effect, deal and so I think there they
there's a tendency I think in general
for kids to play a lot with personality.
If you think about doll play or super
figure play or dress up or pretend play,
it has a lot to do with identity and
personality and and and role kinds of
things. And so you can be a cowboy or
you can be a astronaut or you can be the
you know rock star or whatever but you
develop kind of these sorts of states.
And so I think that's a normal process
that gets recruited by these kids under
these circumstances to help them cope
with this. And uh so they don't have
stable senses of self that generalize
very well.
Yeah, I think I think you know going
forward it would be very helpful to uh
um
uh just just ideate back and forth later
about mapping all of the things you guys
know about how to provide those kind of
um that that kind of evidence, right?
Evidence of being a safe space, evidence
that you have control over your
environment, all that kind of stuff and
how to remap it into things that we can
do for cells. Obviously, cell
collectives don't have the same level or
the same kind of intelligence as as
these kids do, but I think the basic
principles are there. I think we're
going to have to it's the same message
that we're trying to get across. And so,
it would be interesting. I mean, the
most obvious thing we've done, which is
to put an empty biodome on and say,
look, here's your confined environment
where no, you know, where you have
there's more control over the chemical
millia and and not, you know, and you're
protected and all of that. um just to
think about what else what else could
happen for what else could we do for for
example here here's something we could
do I don't know how you guys feel about
this um the the basic active inference
thing that predictable patterns are less
stressful than random patterns one could
imagine within that biodome providing
some kind of a predictable stimulus
that's completely non-specific it by
itself does nothing for regeneration but
it has the feature that it is
predictable and reliable Right. And we
found that actually our recent work
found that even algae like this. So
algae um can tell the difference. They
get stressed out by unpredictability and
they they don't like it. They move away.
They want a predictable, you know, light
source even if it's not any more light
than the random one. They just they just
like that predictability. And you know,
so maybe even something like that, you
know, I I don't know. I'm I'm pulling at
straws here, but I agree with that. Um I
mean, this is for me one of the big
issues trying to treat these kids. Uh,
so many of the kids I see are in
residential treatment. And so you're in
this big kind of group space where
you've got three shifts of staff and
they're reacting to these kids in in
different ways. And so the same behavior
in the kid can elicit very different
responses from the staff. And so the
you're creating a very unpredictable
environment for these kids which is very
hard for them to make sense of or get
better. And so much of the work has to
do with working with the staff and
saying, "Yes, I know the kid. You've
gone over these rules five times with
this kid, but I want you to do it
again." and
continually be constant in in terms of
responses and predictable and be willing
to go back and back and back and back
over these things because the kids don't
have this good cause and effect learning
because the consequences and behavior
are often separated state dependent for
them. And so creating predictability is
is like a major major deal um in in
treating these kids. Um and that's one
of the things like it's easier to do
with foster parents or adoptive parents,
but even they screw up all the time, you
know, and just react. Um you know, I've
told you 10 times to do this or
whatever. Um but but that's very
important in terms of creating safety
for these kids. So, and I think that's
kind of a biodome in a way. It's psycho.
Maybe add to what Frank just said,
Michael, when when u Frank mentioned
type D attachment, it's called
disorganized, meaning the child has no
idea what's coming. They don't they
cannot rely on a parent and parents
predictable state of behavior. And in
the so when the parent leaves they don't
know if they need to cry and that
reliably brings the parent down or they
you know so they don't have a style of
how to deal with that separation which
which is a huge stress but you know I
wanted to ask you both also on on a
different scale of things from from
Frank your paper and and your work
Michael where chronic stress early on in
childhood because Frank you wrote that
in these did cases there's hypercart
cortisol initially but then it it
balances out to hypocortisol in
adulthood. So if we look at the period
of chronic stress in in childhood
there's chronic inflammation
immunosuppression microgodrophe perhaps
but the question is will it bring
reduction in plasticity because if
chronic stress results in reduction in
plasticity this could be a very concrete
level for the onset of aging or
acceleration of aging. Yeah. Um now
that's not just in that those data that
we have come out of abused kids of which
some subset of them are fairly
dissociative but it's not sort of
exactly specific for dissociation but we
do see this uh what we call attenuation
curve uh where they start out higher
than our controls and then they over
adolescence uh drop down and that is
associated with certain biological
consequences. One of which is um that
morbid obesity. Um we just see them
they're they're just like
uh taking off at at age 18. They're the
they're heavier as a group than 75% of
their peers and and um and they're and
their curve is just going like this. And
our controls are just tracking 50th
percentile kind of thing. and and um
it's also showing up in some of the
epigenic stuff and there I've seen
other studies that uh have to do with
sort of uh hyportarol
hypocortisololism and accelerated aging.
So it looks like there is some sort of a
mechanism there that can be teased out.
Um and certainly cortisol we know from a
lot of studies that it's damages the
brain and we know that um that in abused
kids we typically see a lot of areas of
the brain that are in animal studies
damaged by hypercarisolia
um are smaller in abused kids um and so
you know we have reason to believe that
the cortisol has also those kinds of
effects.
Amazing. Super interesting. Um, yeah.
Okay. Um, yeah, I've taken a bunch of
notes. I learned a lot. Um, this is this
has been great. Thank you. Let me let me
ponder some more and I think I'm going
to uh I'll come back with some much more
specific uh some specific questions, but
we should really we should really think
about this. I think I think there's some
some really good stuff here for uh
aspects of regenerative medicine that
are basically stuck. And I think I think
this is some of this is I think the
missing the missing piece.
Okay. Well, very good. I've enjoyed it
very much. I I really liked your papers.
I thought it really opened my eyes in a
number of areas. I really haven't
thought about morphogenesis as being
this powerful process in the same way um
that you really make a strong argument
for. I thought the experiments were
really remarkable. I love the the kidney
tubules and how they maintain same
diameter down single cell. Yeah. Yeah.
Amazing. Yeah, I I think the whole thing
now now if I had to, you know, define
development, I would say it's it's it's
sensemaking. It's B you get you get some
prompts from your genome and that's
great, but but but the fundamental of
the process is it's creative sense
making in real time. Uh that that just,
you know, most of the time it looks like
it has the same outcome, but it really
doesn't have to. And I think we can we
can learn a lot from from the things
that you guys are studying. So,